Israeli Prime Minister Benjamin
Netanyahu is under pressure to support a
new truce and hostage release plan the
plan was tabled by the US Israel's
closest Ally as an Israeli endorsed road
map for an enduring ceasefire to the
conflict that has been raging since the
7th of October attack by the terror
group Hamas Netanyahu labeled the plan a
nonstarter and insists that Israel will
keep fighting until Hamas is eliminated
today we're asking war in Gaza is Israel
ever more
[Music]
isolated hello and welcome to to the
point it is my pleasure to greet our
guests Ronan schanker is a reporter and
columnist for the German daily the Su
saong Marcus ble heads the security
table with a focus on the Middle East at
the online in-depth briefing service
table media and it's great to welcome
Kristen hellberg back to the show she's
an independent author and journalist
with extensive experience in the Middle
East so an all German panel this week to
get a perspective from here in the heart
of Europe and Ronan if I may let me
start with you and ask you to talk a
little bit about the current situation
as I mentioned Joe Biden claimed that
this plan was endorsed and devised by
Israel yet Netanyahu has not exactly
embraced it what chances would you give
this plan of succeeding where so many
others have failed well Joe Biden is
able to threaten Israel with something
very substantial with the um with
pulling back the support which is so um
well essential to Israel's security so
even though Netanyahu is reluctant and
many in his Coalition are even more
reluctant to stop the fighting they're
left with no other choice but to Cave to
the pressure from Washington and we want
to talk a little bit later about that us
uh support and how far it goes kisten
International frustration with Netanyahu
and with the Israeli campaign uh faced
uh a spike after an an Israeli air
strike uh hit a tent camp in Rafa and
killed 45 uh displaced people what
exactly is the current situation now in
Gaza and what are you hearing the
situation is devastating and we are
hearing even more attacks the IDF the
Israeli Army saying that they are
attacking they are going against Hamas
militants and they are killing Hamas
fighters on a regular basis but at the
same time they are a lot of civilians
being killed in these uh attacks we have
then dozens of victims uh among
civilians and this is the whole question
it's about the question how is this war
being led we have a hunger crisis that
is intensifying because the crossing the
Rafa Crossing keeps to be closed after
Israel took military control of this so
everything goes into another Crossing K
Shalom Crossing and we see that even if
the humanitarian Aid gets in which has
uh dropped a lot during the last few
weeks even when it gets in it's very
difficult to distribute it due to a lack
of fuel and due to a lack of security
for humanitarian Aid workers as well so
the situation is even more catastrophic
and devastating than ever before I think
Mar as I mentioned uh Netanyahu has said
that he will keep the campaign going
despite uh the pressure uh until the
terror group Hamas is eliminated in
other words he is looking to keep the
military option open how compatible is
that with this ceasefire plan would it
uh allow him some room to maneuver yes
it does allow him room to maneuver and
his main aim to eliminate
M as a military organization and as an
organization which is able to rule Gaza
uh includes the military option and I
think in the long run netan or no
Israeli government prime minister
whomsoever will not give up the the
right to intervene in Gaza at any time
of the conflict so even if there is a
ceasefire or a peace solution in the
long run Israel as in the West Bank will
send forces in to fight
terrorism let's take a closer look at
this three-phase plan it promises an end
to the conflict the release of the
hostages and reconstruction of
Palestinian territory and it comes at a
time when as we just heard the situation
in Gaza is increasingly dire as is the
desperation of Israelis pleading for the
return of family members still being
held
hostage 8 months of war and a
humanitarian and crisis in the Gaza
Strip the people are suffering and they
wish for only one
thing it's enough we pray to God for a
ceasefire we have lost so much we have
lost all of our loved ones we have
nothing left we need a ceasefire we have
been broken and
humiliated then a few days ago US
President Biden presented a peace plan
for
Gaza it's time to begin this new state
age for the hostages to come home for
Israel to be secure for the suffering to
stop it's time for this war to
end for the day after to
begin the plan has phases beginning with
a ceasefire followed by the release of
hostages and ultimately leading to the
rebuilding of the destroyed Gaza
Strip can the Biden initiative bring
peace to the
region let me put that question to Ronan
and also ask you to unpack the three
phases of this plan uh if you would
briefly and tell us where you see the
biggest challenges especially in regard
to the transition from the temporary
ceasefire to the full cessation of
hostilities how workable is that
transition going to be given netanyahu's
desire to hang on to the military option
so I think peace is a very big word
let's imagine this plan goes through
what is Hamas going to do Hamas is going
to be allowed to regroup to retreat to
rearm themselves and to Stage the next
attack on Israel in another two or three
years as they have done in the past in
the past 20 years whenever they were
defeated and they were allowed to
continue to rule in Gaza and to smuggle
arms into the Gaza Strip so this is the
I would say positive uh Outlook that
Hamas can connect to this um to this
deal and what does it mean for Israel
for Israel this is not a a perspective
of Peace this is a perspective of
continuing a status quo which is
increasingly untenable for the Israeli
Society so I can understand that from an
Israeli government perspective it's very
difficult to agree to this deal what I
can't understand and what I think also
Bears uh also is is is worth uh
highlighting is why Hamas is um not
jumping and and and and celebrating this
chance because all they have to do to
get this incredibly positive deal for
them is to let hostages out Children
civilians who are in some dark cellers
in the Gaza Strip crying for their
mothers at night something that is
unconscionable to all Palestinians also
and that just shows you what kind of a
criminal organization they are with
disregard to the life of their own
population and that of any other country
Kristen yeah please react to that uh
Biden actually claims that the Israeli
campaign has already achieved what it's
set out to do rendered Hamas incapable
of launching another attack similar to
October 7th but Ronan says well they're
just going to use this first phase or
SEC even first and second phases of the
plan to regroup and get ready to act
again would you agree with that or do
you think Biden is right no I mean we
definitely agree on the nature of Hamas
there's no doubt about it but we are
seeing that this war and the way it is
Led does not lead to a defeat of Hamas
we are seeing that for eight months this
aim of total Victory is not working out
because whenever the Israeli Army
withdraws from an area within Gaza that
had just captured Hamas is regrouping so
it's not going to work like this Hamas
has to be kept away from power it has to
be demilitarized by political means and
what Hamas is asking in this deal is a
permanent ceasefire an end to this war
and this is basically what most of the
world wants to uh get this is what
President Biden himself says we need an
end to this war at this time because
it's not working out the plan so I would
argue that yes it's time to The crucial
point is how do we get from phase one to
phase two because phase one says let's
uh free the female and children hostages
and the elderly and then talk about
whether they will be a permanent
ceasefire later on Hamas is saying we
will not agree to release any hostages
without the guarantee by the us to stop
this war definitely uh and um
permanently so this is the whole point
and I think that right now now within
the Israeli public and according to the
families of the hostages especially the
pressure is really mounting on Netanyahu
to say okay we have to give everything
we have to give in because the priority
now has to be the hostages especially
given the fact that there have been some
Dead uh bodies of the hostages have been
found within Gaza so the pressure is
mounting and I think the only way to
stop this is to agree to a permanent
ceasefire and then to dismantle Hamas
and find a solution for post-war Gaza
how do you dismantle them if you don't
we can talk about this you withdraw
which is the plan if you withdraw from
if the Israeli military withdraws from
the Gaza Strip how do you dismantle them
an alternative to step in who let me get
marus yeah let me get Marcus to weigh in
here uh be a tiebreaker as it were is
dismantling Hamas more of a political
question than it is a military one we've
seen that uh Israel says that it has now
uh successfully gained operational
control of the 14 kilm long I believe it
is Corridor between Gaza and Egypt after
having destroyed many Terror
organization tunnels there would you say
that in fact does confirm Biden's claim
that at least temporarily for some
amount of time Hamas is no longer able
to perpetrate military attacks and does
that then provide a basis for moving
toward a political solution I don't
think we're anywhere close to see Hamas
dismantled militarily and I think uh the
dispute if this ceasefire is going to be
temporary or permanent is in the center
of all discussions if this three-phase
plan can come to a lang longer political
solution so I think it's also important
to see that the Israeli government is
all but a monolithic block and if you
listen to some of the voices from the
Israeli Defense Forces they
differentiate
between uh stopping Hamas from being
able to govern Gaza and from defeating
it militarily completely so I think yes
you can reach the point that Hamas will
not be able to govern Gaza but uh with
the peace plan or the three-phase plan
on the table right now you will not
reach a complete military defeat of
Hamas Ron how monolithic is the Israeli
government really we see two right-wing
ministers threatening to walk out if
Netanyahu does agree to the ceasefire
plan on the other hand we also see a
somewhat more moderate and very popular
politician Benny Gans saying that he uh
is going to walk out if there is not a
clear plan for how to govern Gaza by
June 8th so again very very much uh
Netanyahu Under Pressure here also from
within own Coalition as usual I would
say for Israeli politics look there are
two roads that he can go down one road
is to
say let's not listen to the Americans
let's go down the road we wanted to go
down and carry on until we uh pleased
that we've uh sufficiently beaten Hamas
this will take forever this is not
something that you can ever reach this
is probably what a majority of the
Israeli public wants uh it's I think too
easy to say it's only the right- Wingers
I think it's the majority of the Israeli
Society who says we will never be able
to sleep we will never be able to relax
knowing that there is this terrorist
entity waiting for the next chance to
get back out our next and the other road
that you couldn't go down is um to uh to
if you and if if you disagree with the
Americans and they will withdraw their
military support and then Security will
collapse so there's not like there's not
one good way to go and given that
dilemma I think uh netan and the Israeli
public is not not left with a choice if
the Americans are going to pull the plug
and they're going to stop their Military
Support which is a threat that's on the
table you have to listen to that
otherwise you're going to be completely
alone then let's talk about that
American Support uh Marcus the table it
wasn't a piece by you but one of your
colleagues recently attributed gans's uh
decision to uh threaten to break uh with
Netanyahu to American foreign policy uh
and I'd like to know why you see this
that context and also how far you think
Biden would go clearly Biden is now
trying to uh express some disappointment
with his very close friend uh BB but do
you really think that the current uh
disappointment in Washington could lead
to a real cut off of crucial arms
supplies if you look back at the LA in
the to the last eight month the
Americans were staunchly supporting
Israel there's been a delivery of arms
which has not been delivered but ever
since then arms kept on going to Israel
but of course it's a leverage from the
American side to threaten to stop the
security support for Israel talking
about guns the West including the German
government is desperately looking for an
alternative to Netanyahu and Benny gun
was this man but looking back in the
past Benny guns is not that popular in
Israel as he sometimes post supposes to
be he's been in a government with netan
even though before those elections he
said I'm never going to go into a
coalition with netan so that's a bit the
the situation we have on that issue so
domestic politics uh suggesting that
this moment might be opportune for gun
given the fact that there is this Rising
pressure on Netanyahu yes but let's see
what happens after June 8th I have my
doubts that guns will really leave the
war cabinet meanwhile gun's condition
sorry uh but but perhaps just one point
to that gun's condition here a workable
long-term plan for governing Gaza is not
exactly something you come up with
overnight what might a credible
governance structure look like you've
said the only way to really cut off
Hamas is to find workable governance
that doesn't include uh the terror
organization and this is something that
not only Benny guns but the IDF the
mosad the security operators within
Israel is asking this government to
deliver and the US have been asking this
for months so this is really the big
critical point against Natan to to give
us a vision because fighting without a
political strategy is not leading
anywhere so what the idea is that Israel
cannot stay there forever as a military
power this is what the radical ministers
benva and smotri dream about they want
to resettle Gaza but this is not what
the military and other political leaders
are aiming at so the idea is who FS the
vacuum vacuum once the Israeli Army
withdraws and it has to be some kind of
Palestinian entity there has been a lot
of talks about a de of a government of
technocrats it has to be without any
Hamas um people obviously the pa the
Palestinian Authority would be the The
Entity that should be yes leading this
but it has to be reformed it has to be
more credible it has to fight corruption
this is where the European Union and the
other Arab states come in to forces and
there have been talks going on between
different countries in the region who
try exactly this so the idea is that we
have a Palestinian entity taking over
that is being supported from outside by
a us-led multinational Force consisting
of different Arab Nations the Europeans
and obviously the US that have to
guarantee the security of Israel because
Israel will only agree to withdraw
whenever the US can guarantee that there
will be no danger coming out of Gaza so
this is the short-term road map for the
Arab to go into this and to work with
this they have to make sure that there's
a long-term perspective for a
Palestinian state for some kind of
Palestinian sovereignty otherwise they
will not be ready to go in there and
just work as the police forces for an
Israeli occupation or security control
and uh you mentioned uh the countries in
the region in fact meanwhile the US is
also now trying to revive the prospect
of an Israeli Saudi normalization deal
Arab countries have in fact been
criticized for a response to the crisis
that is considered by some of our
observers to be largely symbolic and
rather feeble could the same be said of
other International actors now putting
pressure on Netanyahu let's take a
closer
look Israeli Prime Minister Netanyahu is
coming under increasing pressure more
and more countries are criticizing the
Israeli Army's severe actions in the
Gaza Strip the chief prosecutor of the
international criminal court recently
requested arrest warrants for Netanyahu
and Hamas leaders the accusations
against Netanyahu deliberate attacks on
the civilian population and using
starvation as a weapon of war in the
Gaza Strip charges against Hamas include
war crimes and crimes against
humanity additionally an increasing
number of EU countries now recognize
Palestine as a state most recently
Slovenia Spain Ireland and Norway had
also just taken this step in order to
support two-state solution in the
region domestically Netanyahu is also
facing increasing pressure the farri
politician and Coalition partner itama
Bena threatens to break up the Coalition
if Netanyahu agrees to a
ceasefire opposition leader Benny Gans
who is also a member of the war cabinet
is calling for new
elections and resistance is also growing
among the population tens of thousands
of Israelis are taking to the streets
demanding the release of hostages and
the quick resignation of the head of
government how isolated is
Netanyahu let me put that question to
you Marcus how isolated is Netanyahu at
the moment and does international
pressure really matter to him given that
he is fighting for his political
survival at home of course he's under
pressure of major International un
institutions
face uh confrontation to Israeli
politics you have the ICC which is
uh deciding about issuing arrest
warrants against netan against defense
minister Galant also against Hamas
leaders you've had the recognition of
the state or so-called state of
Palestine by more than 140 states which
increases the
isolation and um the question how Israel
is going to get out of that with the
United Nations facing it so directly is
uh the one which will be decided in the
coming weeks Ronan I know you have a
legal background so let me ask you to
take us on a deeper dive in regard both
to the international criminal court
arrest warrants and also the
international Court of justices ruling
that Israel must halt any military
offensive in Rafa that could harm
civilians juridically do these char
charges and the ruling have
Merit um so the question is it's it's
doubtful whether the um claim of
genocide has Merit the claim of genocide
which was um raised by South Africa and
brought to the international court of
justice in the ha the court of justice
has not yet thrown that out they've used
this opportunity to um warn Israel from
uh disproportionate attacks but they've
not decided on the merits of genocide
and I think it's very doubtful that they
will in the end say this is genocide
because crimes against humanity crimes
against humanity probably also doubtful
war crimes yes and the international
criminal court which is a lot more
precise and a lot more uh has a higher
threshold jurdic has decided to uh level
accusations against both the Israeli and
the Hamas leadership of essentially war
crimes using methods of War which are
illegal it's they're not claiming that
Israel does not have the right to
self-defense in to the opposite they are
explicitly reinforcing that Israel has
this right but they're saying even if
you have a just cause for war this is
not justify every method so one method
that they're pointing out is hunger
whatever your goals are in a war it
never can justify letting or stopping uh
the shipment of food and water and
electricity to uh to civilian population
and thus putting pressure on people who
it's not not the choice of their own to
be in this war zone so uh to to give you
just a brief um Outlook the judges at
the international criminal court will
decide in a few weeks whether they will
issue the arrest warrants against both
the Hamas leadership and netan and
Galant and I think uh it's very likely
that they will uh agree to um issue
these arrest warrants meaning that netan
and Galant will never be able to travel
to Europe ever again Kristen um how do
you see the political impact
of these two uh International uh Court
uh uh decisions or at least the the
prospect of the arrest warrants on the
one hand and the ruling uh about how
Israel should prosecute its military
campaign on the other are they largely
symbolic could they even reinforce the
intransigence of Netanyahu and his
government well I think what we have to
stress right now is what these
International courts are trying to do is
to change the situation Within Gaza it's
not about defining do we have a genocide
or not it's about how to prevent that a
genocide could possibly happen so this
is behind the idea the idea is how to
Implement International humanitarian law
against whoever breaks it be it a
democratically elected leadership be it
a dictatorship be it a terrorist group
so this is important here to stress it's
not about pressuring an Israeli
government or um discrediting Israel as
a state it's about implementing
International humanitarian law as far as
the two uh courts we are talking about
about the recognition of Palestine this
is obviously it's symbolic but I think
it comes out of the idea that we saw
with the 7th of October these horrible
crimes committed there that we cannot go
back to a situation before where we just
neglected the whole subject we have to
understand that without a Palestinian
State and some kind of sovereignty a
life of Palestinians in dignity in uh in
Freedom there will not be a solution to
this conflict and the idea of countries
like Ireland or uh Spain is to stress
this that these people are now these
countries are committed to this
two-state solution that for a too long
time has just been held up as some kind
of you know declaration without doing
anything to implement this so this is a
major step and it's a symbolic it's a
signal as well to the Palestinians to
not give up hope and to believe in some
kind of political solution to prevent
terrorist crimes that we just saw Marcus
last question very brief answer if you
would our title asks whether Israel is
ever more isolated would you say
increasing isolation will make a
difference in getting us closer to a
cessation of the conflict I don't think
so I think with Germany and the US uh
standing so closely on Israel's side I
think they will get out of this
situation despite the recognition of
Palestine and the Court decisions which
we have
talked thank you very much to all of you
for being with us and thanks to all all
of you out there for tuning in look at
our website and tell us what you think
see you soon
[Music]